---
tags: sas, spl5, arbitration
---
# Overview

SAS supports least-recently used arbitration fairness for connection requests.

# Description

- Each SAS port and expander port shall include an an Arbitration Wait Time timer that counts the time from the moment when the port makes a connection request until the request is accepted or rejected.
- The Arbitration Wait Time timer is in the port layer state machine ([7.2.2]()).
- The Arbitration Wait Time timer shall count in microseconds from 0 us to 32 767 us and in milliseconds from 32 768 us to 32 767 ms + 32 768 us. The Arbitration Wait Time timer shall stop incrementing when its value reaches 32 767 ms + 32 768 us.

## Starting Arbitration timer
- SAS port starts the arbitration timer when it transmit the first OPEN address frame for the connection request.
- When the SAS port retransmit the OPEN address frame (likely from losing arbitration and handling an inbound OPEN address frame), it will set the ARBITRATION WAIT TIME field to the current value of the Arbitration Wait Time timer. <!-- Why does it need to know this??-->
- A SAS port should set the Arbitration Wait Time timer to zero when it transmits the first OPEN address frame for the connection request. <!-- Makes sense, it's the initial connection request-->
- A SAS initiator or SAS target port may be unfair by setting the ARBITRATION WAIT TIME FIELD in the OPEN address frame to a higher value than its Arbitration Wait Time timer actually indicates.
	- Restriction is that the unfair SAS port will not set the ARBITRATION WAIT TIME field to higher or equal to 8000h.

### Expander

- When an expander port receives and OPEN address frame, it will also set the Arbitration Wait Time timer to the value of the incoming ARBITRATION WAIT TIME field and start the Arbitration Wait Time timer as the expander port arbitrates for internal access to the outgoing expander port. When the expander device transmits the OPEN address frame out another expander port, it shall ser the outgoing ARBITRATION WAIT TIME field to the current value of the Arbitration Wait Time timer maintained by the incoming expander port