---
tags: sas, spl5, arbitration
---

***

# Expander Logical Phy Arbitration Requirements

An expander logical PHY will set its request path request High Priority argument to one when the expander logical PHY requests a path after:
1. The expander logical PHY has forwarded an OPEN address frame to the logical link;
2. The expander logical PHY receives an OPEN address frame with higher arbitration priority; and
3. The destination SAS address and connection rate of the received OPEN address frame are not equal to the source SAS address and connection rate of the transmitted OPEN address frame.
Otherwise the logical PHY shall set the higher priority argument to zero

(You should look at the XL state machine [6.19]())

# ECM arbitration requirements

## Overview

The ECM shall arbitrate and assign or deny path resources for Request Path Requests form each expander logical PHY.

Arbitration has to follow the SAS Arbitration fairness algorithm and path recovery.

### Path recovery

Used to avoid deadlock scenarios within the SAS topology by choosing which partial pathway to tear down to ensure at least one connection is achieved. This is just like only running the job when you have all the resources, but also a little more dynamic. More incoming.

***

The ECM will maintain an Arbitration Wait Time state machine variable for each request path that the ECM is processing. This variable is initialized for each Request Path request and will continue to increment until the ECM completes the response to the Request Path request.

The Source Address and Connection Rate are set to the value received by the OPEN frame.

The following fields are used to compare the different Request Path requests by the ECM:
1. Source SAS address
2. Connection rate
3. High Priority argument
4. Arbitration wait time state variable

High Priority argument is used to increase the priority of a Request Path after a Backoff Retry response is sent by the expander's logical PHY.

### Upon receiving a Connection Request

1. If the SAS address is for the expander, then the expander will arbitrate for access to its SMP port. <!--That is usually what happens. Expect to see the expander prioritizes commands that are meant for it, since you can assume it's very important-->
2. if the destination SAS address matches a target that is connected to the expander and the ECM is:
	1. not receiving a pause PHY response from an expander logical PHY associated with the connection request; or <!--So basically, when the initiator wants to connect to a target normally, and is not looking to pause PHY-->
	2. receiving a pause PHY response from an expander logical PHY associated with the connection request and the PHY identifier from the connection request is the same as the PHY identifier argument of the pause PHY response; <!-- Is this it trying to pause itself??-->

	Then the ECM will arbitrate for access to those expander logical PHYs. So yeah, it will try to arbitrate for the path if the target is attached to the expander. <!--Does it have to be directly attached?? That is the mystery part-->

3. if the destination SAS address matches an enabled SAS address in the expander's route table for one or more logical PHY that is using the table routing method and the ECM is:
	1. not receiving Pause PHY request from the associated expander logical PHY with the connection request; or
	2. it's receiving a pause PHY response from the expander and that expander has the same PHY identifier as the one for the pause PHY response.

	Then the ECM will arbitrate for access for access to those expander logical PHYs.

4. if at least one expander PHY is using the subtractive routing method, the request did not come from one of those expander logical PHY, and the ECM is:
	1. not receiving pause PHY responses from an expander's logical PHY associated with the connection request; or
	2. receiving Pause PHY responses from an expander logical PHY associated with the connection request and the PHY identifier of the connection request is the same as the PHY identifier for the Pause PHY response.
	
	Then the ECM will arbitrate for access for access to those expander logical PHYs.

Essentially, if the SAS address that is present in the connection request has a SAS address that the expander can quickly get access to, then it will try to get access to it.

### Response

ECM will respond to the Request Path request by sending these back to the PHY:
1. Arbitrating (Normal)
2. Arbitrating (Waiting on Partial)
3. Arbitrating (Blocked on Partial)
4. Arbitrating (Waiting on Connection)

Then it will send a confirmation for the following events:
1. Arb won
2. Arb lost
3. Arb reject

If the ECM receives an IDLE request from a PHY that is involved in the connection before it has received a Forward Close request from that PHY and sent a Forward Close indication to that PHY, then the ECR shall send a Forward Break indication to the destination PHY. <!--What, I don't really understand why this is broken. Uh... Not going to be good when we get to tomorrow's meeting and I get quizzed-->

## Arbitrating Confirmations

Sending the confirmation to the Request Path that arbitration has started.

- Sends an Arbitrating (Normal) after it has received a Request Path request
- Arbitrating (Waiting on Partial) confirmation if it is waiting on a partial pathway. The conditions are:
	- There is a destination port capable of routing to the requested destination SAS address, at least one one expander logical PHY within the destination port supports the requested connection rate, each of the expander logical PHYs within the destination port is returning a PHY status (partial pathway) response or PHY status (blocked partial pathway) response, and at least one of the expander logical PHYs within the destination port is returning a PHY status (Partial Pathway response)