---
tags: spl5, sas, command, response
---

# 8.2.4.2 Command frame handling link layer errors

- When an SSP initiator transmits a COMMAND frame and receives a NAK for that frame, then the COMMAND frame was not received.
	- The SSP initiator will retry transmitting the COMMAND frame at least one time, either through the same or a new connection.
	- The SSP port may reuse the initiator port transfer tag from the frame for which the NAK was received.
- If an SSP port transmits a COMMAND frame and does not receive an ACK or NAK for that frame (e.g., Times out, or the connection is broken), then:
	1. The SSP_TF state machine closes the connection with DONE (ACK/NAK TIMEOUT)
	2. to determine whether the command was received, the SCSI application client calls Send Task Management Request () with:
		1. Nexus set to the I_T_L nexus and the command identifier of the  COMMAND frame; and
		2. Function Identifier set to QUERY TASK; and
		3. The SSP initiator port transmits the TASK frame in a new connection to the SSP target port.
- If the command is write or a bidirectional command and the SSP initiator port receives an XFER_RDY frame for the I_T_L nexus and command identifier combination of the command before the RESPONSE frame for the QUERY TASK, then the COMMAND frame was received and is being processed by the SSP target port, and the XFER_RDY frame is valid.
- If the SSP initiator port receives a RESPONSE frame for the I_T_L nexus and command identifier combination of the command before the RESPONSE frame for the QUERY TASK, then the COMMAND frame was received by the SSP target port, the RESPONSE frame is valid, and the command processing is complete. The SSP initiator port may reuse the initiator port transfer tag of the COMMAND frame.
- If the SSP initiator port receives a RESPONSE frame for the QUERY TASK with a response code of `TASK MANAGEMENT FUNCTION SUCCEEDED`, then the COMMAND frame was received by the SSP target port (i.e., an ACK was transmitted by the SSP target port for the COMMAND frame) and the command is being processed.
- If the SSP initiator port receives a RESPONSE frame from the QUERY task with the response code of `TASK MANAGEMENT FUNCTION COMPLETED`, then the COMMAND frame is not being processed.
	- If neither an XFER_RDY frame, a read DATA frame, nor a RESPONSE frame has been received for the I_T_L nexus and command identifier combination of the command, then the COMMAND frame was not received.
		- The SSP initiator port should retransmit the COMMAND frame at least one time. The SSP initiator port may reuse the initiator port transfer tag of the COMMAND frame.

# 8.2.4.5 Read DATA frame - handling of link layer errors

## Overview

If an SSP target port transmits a read DATA frame for a command with transport layer retries enabled, then the SSP target port processes link layer errors that occur while transmitting read DATA frames as described in the next section
- else if the transport layer retries is disabled, then the SSP target port processes link layer errors that occur while transmitting read DATA frames as described in the following section

## 8.2.4.5.2 Read DATA frame with transport layer retries enabled

If an SSP target transmits a read DATA frame and receives a NAK for that frame, then the read DATA frame was not received.
- The SSP target port retransmits, in the same or in a new connection, all the read DATA frames for that I_T_L nexus and command identifier combination since a previous time when ACK/NAK balance occurred at least one time.

- If the SSP target port transmits a read DATA frame but doesn't receive an ACK or a NAK, then it's going to:
	1. the SSP_TF state machine closes the connection with DONE (ACK/NAK TIMEOUT) and
	2. the ST_TTS state machine retransmits, in a new connection, all the read DATA frames for that I_T_L nexus and command identifier combination since a previous time when ACK/NAK balance occurred at least one time <!--So if we are not getting a response back for the sent message, then the target decides that it will be better to reconnect to the initiator-->
- The `CHANGING DATA POINTER` bit is set to one in the first retransmitted read DATA frame and the `CHANGING DATA POINTER` bit is set to zero in subsequent read DATA frames.
- The `ST_TTS` state machine retransmits each read DATA frame that does not receive an ACK at least one time. <!-- Mechanism for knowing what data frame to send back-->
- The number of times an SSP target port retransmits each read DATA frame is vendor specific. When an SSP target port reaches its vendor specific limit for retransmitting read DATA frame, the SSP target port follows the procedure for transport layer retries disabled in the next section.

## 8.2.4.5.3 Read DATA frame with the transport layer retries disabled

If an SSP target port transmits a read DATA frame and receives a NAK for that frame, then:
1. the SCSI device server calls Send Command Complete () to return CHECK CONDITION status for that command with the sense key set to ABORTED COMMAND and the additional sense code set to NAK RECEIVED; and
2. The SSP target port transmits the RESPONSE frame in the same or a new connection

Else if it does not receive an ACK or NAK, then:
1. The SSP_TF state machine close s the connection with DONE (ACK/NAK TIMEOUT);
2. The SCSI device server with the sense key set to ABORTED COMMAND and the additional sense code set to ACK/NAK TIMEOUT; and
3. the SSP target port transmits the RESPONSE frame in new connection.